seti.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: SETI
show: hide
---

I began working on SETI as a summer REU student at Breakthough Listen and the Berkeley SETI Research Center in 2022. Below are my past and current projects.

### Signal Synchronization Strategies and Time Domain SETI
![SETI Ellipsoid](/images/seto_scheme.jpg "SETI Ellipsoid")
*Credit: Danielle Futselaar / Breakthrough Listen*

As a summer REU student, I worked with Steve Croft (UCB) and [James Davenport](https://jradavenport.github.io/) (UW) on implementing signal synchronization strategies with Gaia Data Release 3. The idea that an extraterrestrial civilization may synchronize their transmission with a conspicuous astrophysical event, such as a supernova, forms the basis of the SETI Ellipsoid and the related signaling scheme proposed by [Seto (2021)](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/1538-4357/ac0c7b). It has only recently become feasible to implement these frameworks with the precise astrometric capabilities of Gaia.

![Seto Scheme](/images/setoAnimation.gif "Seto Scheme")
Seto Scheme *Credit: Andy Nilipour*

After constraining possible SETI candidates with these signal synchronization frameworks, I developed a novel time domain SETI analysis that is sensitive to unexpected changes in a star's light curve that occur when the star is expected to be a prime search candidate according to either the SETI Ellipsoid or the Seto scheme. While I only applied this to Gaia light curves, it can easily be extended to other time domain instruments, such as TESS or the upcoming Vera Rubin Observatory.

Although no particular interesting candidates were found, we are continuing the search and the utilization of these tools. We used the SETI Ellipsoid with SN 2023ixf, a supernova detected in the galaxy M101 in May 2023, to select a sample of technosignature candidates, which we then observed with the Allen Telescope Array and the Green Bank Telescope; this is described in more detail in [Davenport et al. (2023)](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/2515-5172/acdc24).

The repository for this project is available [here](https://github.com/anilipour/Gaia-DR3-Time-Domain-SETI). More information can be found in the upcoming Nilipour et al. (in press). There has also been some press coverage of this project; see [here](https://www.economist.com/science-and-technology/2023/01/18/ideas-for-finding-et-are-getting-more-inventive).


### LSST Technosignature Search

I am currently working with Steve Croft and James Davenport on developing a classifier for LSST lightcurves. We are using data from [ELAsTiCC](https://github.com/LSSTDESC/elasticc), which provides simulated alerts and contains one technosignature among the various types of transients. Our goal is to identify the technosignature, and, along the way, be able to classify everything else as well.

More to come!

### Spider Pulsars as Stellivores

I am also working with Clement Vidal (UCB) on testing whether some spider pulsars, which are millisecond pulsars with very low mass companions, may be advanced extraterrestrial civilizations feeding on their companion star for energy. We are looking for potential close encounters with other stars, which could be a sign of goal-oriented behavior. Close stellar encounters have been studied as a potential technosignature (e.g. [Hansen (2022)](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/1538-3881/ac3a8b)); we are testing that hypothesis for spider pulsars in particular, because if they do indeed host civilizations using their companion star for energy, the low companion mass will necessitate the capture of another star to feed on.

More to come as well!

Commit message:

Updated Signal Synchronization Strategies paper

seti.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: SETI
show: hide
---

I began working on SETI as a summer REU student at Breakthough Listen and the Berkeley SETI Research Center in 2022. Below are my past and current projects.

### Signal Synchronization Strategies and Time Domain SETI
![SETI Ellipsoid](/images/seto_scheme.jpg "SETI Ellipsoid")
*Credit: Danielle Futselaar / Breakthrough Listen*

As a summer REU student, I worked with Steve Croft (UCB) and [James Davenport](https://jradavenport.github.io/) (UW) on implementing signal synchronization strategies with Gaia Data Release 3. The idea that an extraterrestrial civilization may synchronize their transmission with a conspicuous astrophysical event, such as a supernova, forms the basis of the SETI Ellipsoid and the related signaling scheme proposed by [Seto (2021)](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/1538-4357/ac0c7b). It has only recently become feasible to implement these frameworks with the precise astrometric capabilities of Gaia.

![Seto Scheme](/images/setoAnimation.gif "Seto Scheme")
Seto Scheme *Credit: Andy Nilipour*

After constraining possible SETI candidates with these signal synchronization frameworks, I developed a novel time domain SETI analysis that is sensitive to unexpected changes in a star's light curve that occur when the star is expected to be a prime search candidate according to either the SETI Ellipsoid or the Seto scheme. While I only applied this to Gaia light curves, it can easily be extended to other time domain instruments, such as TESS or the upcoming Vera Rubin Observatory.

Although no particular interesting candidates were found, we are continuing the search and the utilization of these tools. We used the SETI Ellipsoid with SN 2023ixf, a supernova detected in the galaxy M101 in May 2023, to select a sample of technosignature candidates, which we then observed with the Allen Telescope Array and the Green Bank Telescope; this is described in more detail in [Davenport et al. (2023)](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/2515-5172/acdc24).

The GitHub repository for this project is available [here](https://github.com/anilipour/Gaia-DR3-Time-Domain-SETI). More information can be found in the paper, [Nilipour et al. (2023)](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/1538-3881/acde79). The arXiv version is available [here](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.00066). There has also been some press coverage of this project, including in [The Economist](https://www.economist.com/science-and-technology/2023/01/18/ideas-for-finding-et-are-getting-more-inventive) and [YaleNews](https://news.yale.edu/2023/07/31/searching-extraterrestrial-life-keeping-eye-exploding-stars).


### LSST Technosignature Search

I am currently working with Steve Croft and James Davenport on developing a classifier for LSST lightcurves. We are using data from [ELAsTiCC](https://github.com/LSSTDESC/elasticc), which provides simulated alerts and contains one technosignature among the various types of transients. Our goal is to identify the technosignature, and, along the way, be able to classify everything else as well.

More to come!

### Spider Pulsars as Stellivores

I am also working with Clement Vidal (UCB) on testing whether some spider pulsars, which are millisecond pulsars with very low mass companions, may be advanced extraterrestrial civilizations feeding on their companion star for energy. We are looking for potential close encounters with other stars, which could be a sign of goal-oriented behavior. Close stellar encounters have been studied as a potential technosignature (e.g. [Hansen (2022)](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/1538-3881/ac3a8b)); we are testing that hypothesis for spider pulsars in particular, because if they do indeed host civilizations using their companion star for energy, the low companion mass will necessitate the capture of another star to feed on.

More to come as well!
